Collective Seed Storage: Share a Tiny Space of
Your Freezer to Increase Resilience of Ex-situ Seed
Conservation
Andrea Vitaletti
Sapienza University of Rome
vitaletti@diag.uniroma1.it
Abstract—More than 95% of the crop genetic erosion articles
analyzed in [1] reported changes in diversity, with nearly 80%
providing evidence of loss. The lack of diversity presents a severe
risk to the security of global food systems. Without seed diversity,
it is difficult for plants to adapt to pests, diseases, and changing
climate conditions. Genebanks, such as the Svalbard Global Seed
Vault, are valuable initiatives to preserve seed diversity in a single
secure and safe place. However, according to our analysis of
the data available in the Seed Portal, the redundancy for some
species might be limited, posing a potential threat to their future
availability. Interestingly, the conditions to properly store seeds
in genebanks, are the ones available in the freezers of our homes.
This paper lays out a vision for Collective Seed Storage relying
on a peer-to-peer infrastructure of domestic freezers to increase
the overall availability of seeds. We present a Proof-of-Concept
focused on monitoring the proper seed storing conditions and
incentive user participation through a Blockchain lottery. The
PoC proves the feasibility of the proposed approach and outlines
the main technical issues that still need to be efficiently solved
to implement the proposed vision.

I. I NTRODUCTION
There are over 50,000 edible plants worldwide, but just 15
provide 90% of the world’s food energy intake and among
these, rice, corn (maize), and wheat contribute up to two-thirds
1
. We have to put all our efforts to preserve those fundamental
energy assets.
The need for seed diversity A key objective in preserving
these plants is to protect seed diversity, that is, the wide range
of plant species, cultivars and genetic materials found within a
given crop. This genetic diversity is a vital resource on which
the future of our food systems depends.
As climate change intensifies, bringing extreme weather
events along with emerging pests and diseases, the presence
of specific genes becomes critical. These genes enable certain
crop varieties to withstand heat, drought, pests, and pathogens,
forming the foundation of agricultural resilience and adaptation.
A limited seed pool not only threatens our ability to cope
with environmental stresses but also risks the loss of flavor,
nutritional value, and the cultural heritage embedded in traditional cuisines. Genetic diversity improves agriculture’s ability
to adapt to changing climates, regional growing conditions,
and evolving consumer preferences.
1 https://education.nationalgeographic.org/resource/food-staple/

Without broad access to diverse crop varieties, future generations will face serious constraints in shaping agriculture to
meet their needs and respond to environmental challenges.
Our preservation efforts should also extend to Crop Wild
Relatives (CWRs), as they play an important role. They are
wild plant species that are closely related to cultivated crops
and can provide genetic diversity that may not be available
in current cultivated varieties. This diversity may be used to
improve the productivity, resilience, and quality of agricultural
products. The Earth is losing plant genetic diversity at an
unprecedented rate. More than 95% of the crop genetic erosion
articles analyzed in [1] reported changes in diversity, with
nearly 80% providing evidence of loss. The extent of this
loss varied depending on species, taxonomic and geographic
scale, region, and analytical approach. In many countries, seed
diversity has been irreversibly diminished, limiting farmers’
crop options.
Efforts to preserve seed diversity. Preservation of seed
diversity is considered a common fundamental goal among the
countries organized in the Multilateral System of Access and
Benefit Sharing (MLS [2]), part of the International Treaty on
Plant Genetic Resources for Food and Agriculture (PGRFA).
MLS allows member states to share and exchange plant
genetic resources for research, breeding, conservation, and
training. Recipients sign a Standard Material Transfer Agreement (SMTA) [3] that specifies conditions for use and benefit
sharing. MLS includes 64 of the world’s most important crops
that together represent 80% of all human consumption derived
from plants [4].
The main strategies to preserve seed diversity are conservation in situ and ex situ .
In situ conservation relies on the conservation of seeds
and plants in their natural or traditional environment, such
as farms where traditional varieties (landraces) are maintained or in the wild where CWR grow. Participatory seed
breeding and community seed systems engage local farmers
in storing, conserving, sharing, and improving diverse crop
varieties adapted to local conditions. Seed guardians (or seed
custodians), who may be smallholder farmers, indigenous
communities, or members of community seed banks, such as
[5]–[8], actively preserve, cultivate, and exchange traditional
or locally adapted varieties, often operating outside formal
industrial seed systems.

Criteria

In Situ Conservation

Ex Situ Conservation

Location
Evolution
Risk of Loss
Cultural Link
Access & Sharing
Documentation
Cost
Best Use

Natural environment / farms
Plants continue to adapt naturally.
Higher (e.g., land-use change, climate)
Strong; maintains traditional knowledge
Local and informal
Often limited or informal
Lower short-term cost
Wild relatives, landraces
TABLE I

Seed banks, seed vaults, labs
Static; no natural evolution
Lower (secure and controlled conditions)
Weak or absent
Global access via formal mechanisms (e.g., SMTA)
Detailed and standardized
Higher cost (infrastructure and maintenance)
Major crops, backup, and global breeding

C OMPARISON BETWEEN IN SITU AND EX SITU SEED CONSERVATION METHODS .

Although in situ conservation has the merit of actively
participating local communities and farmers, thus contributing
to the conservation of not only the seeds, but also the traditions
and skills to take care of them, the access to the material
and the documentation is fragmented and difficult to handle.
These problems have led to the development of several more
structured ex situ conservation initiatives, where seeds are
preserved outside their natural habitat in the so-called seed
banks.
Seed banks. A seed bank is a gene bank, that stores seeds to
preserve genetic diversity, namely the genes that make each
plant variety unique. It ensures that this genetic heritage is
safely conserved and available for people to use.
The Millennium Seed Bank Partnership (MSB) [9] is the
largest ex situ plant conservation program in the world, mainly
focused on wild species. MSB focuses on the conservation of
as many species as possible (interspecific diversity) prioritizing
those that are endangered, endemic, or economically important. It provides seeds to registered organizations for research,
restoration, and reintroduction purposes.
Crop Trust [10] is an international organization focused
on building and supporting a global system of seed banks
to preserve the genetic diversity of food crops, especially
cultivated varieties and landraces. It provides long-term grants
and partnership agreements to several international seed
banks, particularly those within the Consultative Group on
International Agricultural Research (CGIAR) system. CGIAR
genebanks [11] manage collections of more than 20 staple
crops in 10 locations across five continents to distribute seeds
for research, training, and breeding under the MLS framework.
Genesys is an online platform2 managed by Crop Trust that
provides access to information about plant genetic resources
conserved in genebanks around the world. It serves as a global
catalogue, aggregating data on millions of accessions from
over 450 genebanks, included CGIAR ones.
The Crop Trust also co-manages the Svalbard Global Seed
Vault in Norway (SGSV)3 , which serves as a global backup
facility for seed banks worldwide [12]. Its purpose is to
provide long-term backing for genebank collections to secure
the foundation of our future food supply against threats such
as mismanagement, accidents, equipment failures, funding
cuts, war, sabotage, disease, and natural disasters. In 2019,
2 https://www.genesys-pgr.org/
3 https://www.seedvault.no/

seeds were returned from Svalbard to restock an international
genebank destroyed by the war in Syria.
Contrary to MSB it is not open to researchers and the
depositors are the only ones who can withdraw their own
seeds. The focus of SGSV is to preserve as much diversity
as possible within crop species and their wild relatives (intraspecific diversity).
Seed banks must ensure that their holdings remain alive.
They periodically check the viability of the samples, namely
their ability to grow into productive plants and produce fresh
material when needed. However, the fundamental strategy to
preserve such diversity is the availability of good backup
systems, namely other seed banks where duplicate samples
are delivered for safe keeping.
Seed preservation pipeline The standards for seed preservation [13]–[15] recommend implementing a comprehensive
preservation pipeline, summarized in Table II. The underlying
principle is that safe storage alone is insufficient; it is equally
essential to establish the conditions and maintain the knowledge necessary to reliably propagate seeds over time. In this
paper, however, we focus exclusively on the second step of the
pipeline, motivated by the open problem discussed in the next
section. In Section V, we explain why, despite this limitation,
we consider this step a fundamental contribution toward the
eventual implementation of the full preservation pipeline in a
fully distributed setting, encouraging citizen participation.
Open problem The SGSV is unanimously considered the
backup seed facility that provides the highest standards of
safety and security. The location where SGSV is built lacks
tectonic activity and has permafrost, which aids in preservation; furthermore, it is 130 m above sea level, keeping
the site dry even if the ice caps melt. The refrigeration
units also cool the seeds to -18,-20 ◦ C, the internationally
recommended standard temperature [13]. If the equipment
fails, it is estimated that it will take two centuries for it to
warm to 0 ◦ C.
The 2023 SGSV Annual Progress Report [16] reveals that, 1267127 samples deposited by more than 100
genebanks/institutes and representing more than 6,000 plant
species are stored in the facility. The SGSV now safeguards
seeds of more than 250,000 types of wheat, 160,000 types of
rice and 46,000 types of maize, the fundamental sources of
food energy intake.
Figure 1 shows the distribution of the depositors (i.e.

Step
Acquisition of germplasm

Drying and storage

Seed viability monitoring

Regeneration

Characterization

Evaluation

Documentation

Distribution and exchange

Safety duplication

Security and personnel

Description
Collecting seeds or other
reproductive material from diverse
sources, including wild relatives,
local varieties, and breeding
programs, to ensure genetic
diversity.
Reducing seed moisture content
and storing under controlled
conditions (temperature, humidity)
to maximize longevity and
maintain viability.
Periodically testing seeds to
ensure they remain capable of
germination and identifying when
regeneration is needed.
Growing out seeds to produce
fresh seeds, maintaining genetic
integrity while replacing aging or
depleted stock.
Documenting observable traits
(morphology, growth habits,
resistance traits) to describe the
germplasm and facilitate its use.
Assessing performance under
different conditions, including
agronomic, nutritional, or
stress-tolerance traits, to determine
the value of the germplasm.
Recording all relevant data on
origin, traits, storage conditions,
and usage to ensure traceability
and informed utilization.
Providing seeds to breeders,
researchers, farmers, or other
genebanks to promote use,
collaboration, and conservation.
Creating backup copies of
germplasm, often in separate
locations or facilities, to protect
against loss from disasters or
failures.
Security and personnel – Ensuring
the physical, legal, and operational
security of the seed collection,
and maintaining trained staff to
manage the conservation process.
TABLE II

S TEPS IN THE SEED CONSERVATION PIPELINE

genebanks and institutes) for the species obtained by analyzing
the data from the SGSV Seed Portal 4 .
The vast majority of species have a single depositor. In
other words, the data show that the samples are available
at SGCV and at the depositor only. As an example, Oryza
sativa (i.e. the Asian cultivated rice) is the most common rice
cultivated as a cereal. The result of the query to the Seed
Portal with the keyword Species: Oryza sativa is 29 depositors,
171193 accessions and 136 countries of collection. The same
query with the keyword Species: Hygroryza aristata, gives
1 depositor (i.e. the Rice Research Institute), 4 accessions
and 1 country of collection as also confirmed by the Genesys
online platform. Rice is currently by far more “important” than
Hygroryza for food supply, however, the Hygroryza is a CWR
4 https://seedvault.nordgen.org/Search

Fig. 1. The distribution of the depositors for the species in the SGSV. The
majority have a single depositor posing a potential threat to seed availability.

of rice [17] and, as already observed, it might contribute to
the development of more resilient new rice varieties.
The low level of redundancy in the availability of seeds
samples backups for the majority of the species, might have
serious consequences; even in the best genebanks, things
can occasionally go disastrously wrong. The question we
aim to investigate in this paper is whether it is possible to
further increase the overall availability of seeds by a robust
and resilient backup infrastructure capable of preserving seed
diversity with limited investments.
Contributions of the paper. We recognize that a comprehensive strategy for seed preservation must address all
components of the conservation pipeline skteched in table II
and should actively encourage citizen participation to raise
awareness and engagement. Nonetheless, having a robust and
resilient backup remains a fundamental element of such a
strategy. In this paper, we focus specifically on this essential,
though narrowly defined, objective.
Interestingly, the temperature conditions in domestic freezers can meet the international standard for long-term seed
conservation [13], [14]. The main idea of this paper is to
develop a system inspired by the principles of the shared
economy, capable of safely storing the seeds in our home
freezers, thus contributing to the development of a Collective
Seed Storage (CSS) that can increase the availability of seeds
and the overall resilience of the world’s crop diversity. To our
knowledge, this paper is the first attempt to build a peer-to-peer
infrastructure to preserve seed diversity. We first identified a
set of requirements, and then we built a proof-of-concept of the
CSS that proves the technical feasibility of two fundamental
tasks, namely the IoT monitoring activity of seed conservation
conditions in domestic freezers and the interaction of the IoT
node with a Blockchain smart contract to autonomously manage a lottery to incentivize user participation. The development
of this PoC, allows us to identify the main issues that need to
be investigated in future work.
II. BACKGROUND AND S TATE OF THE A RT
Moisture, temperature, and the proportion of oxygen are key
environmental factors that affect seed deterioration and loss of
viability [18]. Reducing seed moisture content (MC), namely

Fig. 2. Figure 2 from [18] Creative Commons CC BY license. Predicted
survival curves for seeds of foxglove at different conditions

the amount of water in the seed, to certain thresholds increases
longevity predictably for approximately 90% of species. These
species are classified as being orthodox in their seed storage
requirements, and generally retain viability and germinability
even after storage for long periods under suitably dry, cool
conditions. In general, most of our food energy intake from
plants is orthodox. Examples of crop plants that bear orthodox
seeds are wheat (Triticum aestivum L.), cereal rye (Secale
cereale L.), and legumes such as the common bean (Phaseolus
vulgaris L.), rice (Oryza sativa) and in general most grains and
legume types, namely most of our food energy intake from
plants.
The Seed Information Database5 provides a tool to Predict
Storage Time for orthodox seeds according to the equations
of Ellis and Roberts [19]. Figure 2 is taken from [18] and
shows the predicted survival curves for seeds of foxglove
(Digitalis purpurea L.) at different conditions of temperature,
relative humidity (RH) and moisture content (MC). The figure
clearly shows that the long-term genebank storage conditions,
namely -20◦ C and 4% seed moisture content, allow us to
preserve germination for years. The Food and Agriculture
Organization (FAO) standardized the process for long-term
storing of orthodox seeds in [13], [14]. We require our system
to comply with these standards, as specified in R1, section III.
In this paper, we share the definition of shared economy by
Frenken et al. “consumers granting each other temporary access to under-utilized physical assets (idle capacity), possibly
for money.” [20].
Example of shared economy ranges from carpooling (e.g.
BlaBlaCar), to share rooms in an apartment (e.g. Airbnb) or
to utilize transport capacity that may be wasted in inefficient
transport operations (e.g. Shiply), just to mention few exam-

ples. In our case, we share the currently idle capacity of a tiny
portion of the freezer, sufficient to store the seeds.
The sharing economy can benefit from integration with the
Internet of Things (IoT) [21]. IoT technologies can be used
to monitor the availability of idle capacity and to verify that
specific requirements are met (see, for example, requirement
R1 in Section III). In the scenario we envision, however, IoT
is not merely a means of monitoring proper conservation conditions; it also serves as a tool for sharing objective, verifiable
knowledge among participants. In this way, IoT contributes to
the collective knowledge base required to fully implement the
seed preservation pipeline introduced in Section I.
A vast body of literature explores the data economy and
shared-resource paradigms. For instance, in [22], the authors
present the design, implementation, and evaluation of an
ambient environment-aware system that supports fine grained
urban air quality monitoring through mobile crowdsensing
integrated into a bike sharing infrastructure.
SETI@home6 and Folding@home7 are two prominent examples of the sharing economy in which the idle capacity,
namely, the computational power of users’ personal computers,
is used to support large scale distributed computations, such
as radio signal analysis and protein dynamics simulation.
Unlike the aforementioned examples, although the freezer
space required is limited, the seeds are expected to be stored
for extended periods, potentially spanning several years. While
participation in a global effort for seed preservation should not
necessarily require compensation, the long-term nature of seed
storage may nonetheless limit user participation. This, in turn,
calls for the definition of appropriate incentive mechanisms to
encourage the involvement of a sufficiently large number of
participants.
As discussed in [23], enjoyment, economic incentives, reputation, and self-fulfillment are among the primary motivations
for participation in sharing-economy initiatives. In this context,
we are particularly interested in investigating how blockchain
technology can be leveraged to distribute and manage such
incentives.
In [24], the authors explore blockchain-based incentive
mechanisms in which participation in a lottery serves as
the reward: only peers actively contributing to the CSS are
eligible to purchase tickets and potentially win. This approach
illustrates how decentralized technologies can be used to align
individual incentives with collective goals.
III. R EQUIREMENTS
In this section we describe the main requirements that drive
the design of the CSS proof-of-concept.
R1 Storing conditions of seeds in domestic freezers must
comply with [13], [14]. In this paper, we focus on longterm storage of orthodox seeds. Specifically we assume
that after drying, samples meant for long-term storage
are packaged under controlled conditions, in clearly
6 https://setiathome.berkeley.edu/

5 https://ser-sid.org/viability/storage-time

7 https://foldingathome.org/

labelled airtight containers (Standard 4.2.2 [13]) and
then samples are ideally stored at -18◦ C ± 3 percent and
relative humidity of 15 ± 3 percent (Standard 4.2.3 [13]).
Figure 4 of [14] is a summary diagram of the workflow
and activities for drying and storage and clarifies that the
use of subzero freezers is acceptable if ideal conditions
are not available.
The success of this project relies on the active and numerous
participation of users. To encourage the participation, the
system should:
R2 Simplify the installation without requiring any specific
technical skill or infrastructure. The installation of the
system should be user friendly and based on off-theshelves equipment. We only assume users have a WiFi
at home.
R3 Not require unnecessary cables which complicates and
limit the installation options.
R4 Run for at least 1 year without the need of intervention
by the user.
R5 Support the implementation of suitable incentive mechanisms.
IV. P ROOF - OF - CONCEPT
The main purpose of this section is to demonstrate the
feasibility of the proposed approach by the implementation
of a Proof-of-Concept (PoC) of the Collective Seed Storage
driven by the above requirements. The PoC will also outline
the main technical problems that still need to be efficiently
solved to realize a fully fledged solution.
The airtight container storing the seeds is equipped with a
humidity and temperature sensor (the DHT22) connected to
an IoT sensor node, in our case the Esp32 Devkit V1 (Esp32
in the following), which implements the logic to acquire the
sensor readings and to deliver them to the smart contract in
charge of dispensing the incentives to the participants.
The Esp32 delivers the data to the smart contract by the onboard WiFi. WiFi access points are nowadays largely available
in homes (see R2) making this technology appropriate for the
project, furthermore, the nature of the phenomenon to be monitored does not require frequent data acquisition; temperature
and humidity in the freezer do not suddenly change. For this
reason, the node alternates long period of deep sleep with
a short active period where two main tasks are performed,
namely data acquisition and communication. In deep sleep
mode, only the RTC Timer and RTC Memory are active,
reducing the consumption to 10µA. The resulting low duty
cycle prolongs the lifetime of the node, and allows us to meet
the requirement R4 as quantified in section IV-C.
To satisfy R3, the Esp32 is powered by a 3.6V LiFePo4.
This solution does not require any voltage regulator that would
introduce losses. In the future, we plan to design a more
efficient custom board without all unnecessary components.
The ESP32 operating temperature range8 is from −40 to
125 ◦ C, so in principle it can also be placed into the freezer
8 https://www.espressif.com/sites/default/files/documentation/esp32

datasheet en.pdf

together with the DHT22 temperature and humidity sensor,
however, the wifi connectivity could be severely hindered. In
our experiments, when the ESP32 is placed into the freezer,
more then 40% of the packets do not reach the server.
Furthermore, it is well known the the efficiency of batteries
decreases significantly in cold temperatures: at -20°C to -40°C,
a LiFePo4 battery may only achieve about 60% to 40% of its
rated capacity9 . Finally, despite being small, the ESP32 steal
some further space in the user’s freezer. For these reasons,
the DHT22 is placed into the freezer and it is connected to
the ESP32 placed outside, by three tiny wires. This solution
is not fully consistent with R3, but it is acceptable and the
arguments discussed above togheter with the simplicity of the
installation, makes it compliant with R2.
A sketch of the architecture of the Proof-of-Concept is
shown in figure 3. The PoC is build with PlatformIO 10
and the code is available on https:// github.com/ andreavitaletti/
PlatformIO/ tree/ main/ Projects/ web3E SC.
In the following, we discuss the implementation of the two
main tasks performed by the PoC during the active period,
namely monitoring the correct storage of seeds and delivering
the observed data to the smart contract in charge of incentive
users participation.
A. Monitoring the Correct Storage of Seeds
The temperature and humidity conditions at which seeds are
stored in the freezer, are monitored by a DHT22 sensor (see
R1). It features excellent technical specifications also in terms
of power consumption. The sensor can be queried by a single
wire protocol: when the sensor node sends the start signal, the
DHT22 change from stand-by-mode (40 µA) to measuringmode (1 mA). The DHT22 will get back to stand-by-mode
again upon the completion of the data acquisition.
Figure 4 shows the results of a monitoring activity on
a domestic freezer (BOSCH KGN39X23) set at -18 ◦ C of
temperature. Samples are taken every 5 minutes. After an
initial transient period, the observed temperature oscillates
significantly. These conditions do not fulfill the Standard
4.2.3 [13] but are consistent with the acceptable subzero conditions indicated in [14] when the ideal ones are not available.
The implications of these conditions in seed conservation and
the possibility to reach the ideal ones in domestic freezer are
object of future studies.
Domestic freezers are occasionally opened to access the
frozen products. We performed a simple experiment to evaluate the impact of this activity on the temperature. We left the
freezer close for 1 hour and then we opened it for 30 secs.,
a more than sufficient interval of time to access the frozen
products; the impact on the temperature is marginal at the
first decimal figure of the temperature.
9 https://www.evlithium.com/Blog/lifepo4-battery-temperature-range-capacity-voltage.
html
10 https://platformio.org/

Fig. 3. The architecture of the Proof-of-Concept for the Collective Seed Storage. A temperature and humidity sensor is placed into the freezer and it is
connected to an IoT sensor node placed outside. The node communicates the readings on the conservation conditions to a smart contract in charge of dispensing
incentives to encourage users’ participation.

Fig. 4. The observed temperature drops immediately after the placement of
the sensor into the freezers, then fluctuates noticeably.

B. Delivering the observed data to the smart contract
Once data have been acquired, they are delivered to the
blockchain smart contract in charge of distributing the incentives to encourage users’ participation (see R5). In our PoC,
we envision the development of a blockchain lottery, where
users can participate (and possibly have higher chances of
winning) if and only if they are active peers of the CSS. The
lottery is implemented with a simple smart contract similar
to that available at https://github.com/Scofield-Idehen/Lottery
Contract/blob/main/Lot Contract.sol. The function enter(uint
temp, uint hum) allows the participation only of active
CSS users, namely users that provide data on temperature and humidity in the acceptable range. The func-

tion fund, allows anyone to fund the lottery. The code
of the smart contract, together with some sample transactions, can be accessed at https://sepolia.etherscan.io/address/
0x19aeacb63eba19e5e159a5870fa6afce5d3b37ec.
A more complex lottery and a through study on the most
suitable incentive mechanisms to be implemented in the smart
contract is beyond the scope of this paper and will be investigated in future work.
Most solutions interfacing IoT nodes with smart contracts
on the Blockchain, relays on gateways. This would greatly
simplify the integration, but we cannot expect that all the
houses have the necessary skills and tools to deploy such a
relatively complex infrastructure (see R2). For this reason, all
the code to interact with the smart contract through the Infura
API11 is contained in the firmware of the resource constrained
ESP32. This might be a pretty challenging solution due to
the limited memory available on the ESP32, indeed our code,
based on the WEb3E library 12 , occupies 93% of the available
flash. This solution foresees only outgoing transmissions (from
the home to the Internet), thus increasing the security against
possible network threats.
The WEb3E library 13 allows the node to interact with
the Solidity smart contract shown in Listing IV-B; it is a
simple key-value storage, where the key is the address of the
node and value contains the last observed temperature and
humidity. The smart contract is deployed on the Sepolia testnet
and can be accessed at https://sepolia.etherscan.io/address/
0xeda34ef93426dcffde0e9f7c92370d6f8ad9f233 where also
the trasactions from the nodes can be inspected.
The implementation required few minor changes to the
library, the most important of which is the encoding of the con11 https://www.infura.io/
12 https://github.com/AlphaWallet/Web3E
13 https://github.com/AlphaWallet/Web3E

listingA
minimalistic
Smart
Contract
to
Store/Retrive
Sensor
Readings
In-chain.
[linenos,tabsize=2,breaklines,xleftmargin=20pt]soliditysc.sol
tract data instead of relying on the contract.SetupContractData
function provided by the library; this was necessary to handle
some run-time issues with the variadic implementation of the
function.
DHT22 readings are given as floating numbers that are
not supported by Solidity. To simplify the management of
readings by the smart contract also for negative values, we
applied the following simple formula 40 + rount(temp)
with temp ranging from -40°C to 80°C, as defined in the
technical specification of the DHT22. Consequently, the value
transmitted to the smart contract is a single byte representing
a value between 0 (-40°C) and 120 (80°C). The transactions
can be accessed at the same URL of the smart contract. Floats
can be also encoded in 4 bytes using the IEEE 754 standard,
but this makes more complex the logic of the smart contract.
C. Energy Consumption
In this section we report on the experiments to evaluate the
energy consumption through an INA21914 . The Esp32 devkit
V1, has an always on red led, with a fix consumption of 10mA.
We unsoldered the led and the consumption dropped to less
than 4mA, however still pretty far from the nominal 10µA in
deep sleep. In the following, to evaluate the potentials of our
work, we assume to achieve the nominal current consumption
during the sleeping period.
We sampled several active periods and figure 5 shows
the current consumption in one of those periods; similar
values have been observed for the others. Active periods are
made of two tasks, the init task where all the necessary
components are initialized, and the com where the data are
read by the DHT and are transmitted to the smart contract.
The init task lasts about 2400ms (≈0.0007h) at about 50mA,
namely ≈ 0.03mAh, while the com task lasts about 3160ms
(≈0,0009h) at about about 100mA, namely ≈ 0.09mAh. We
assume the duration of the sleep period is X hours at 10µA,
namely 0.01XmAh. The whole consumption for a cycle is
0.03mAh + 0.09mAh + 0.01XmAh. The ESP32 is powered
by a common 3.6v, 1.5Ah LiFePo4 battery. This guarantees a
number of cycles 1500mAh/(0.12+0.01X)mAh. The length
of a cycle is 0.0016 + X hours. The whole duration in hours
will be 1500/(0.12+0.01X)·(0.0016+X) and with X ≥ 0.73
hours, we meet requirement R4, namely a duration of 1 year.
Note that the smart contract gets in input an unsigned int
made of 32 bytes, so we can pack up to 32 readings (they need
1 byte), into a single call, thus reducing the overall number
of required transmissions.
V. C ONCLUSIONS AND F UTURE W ORK
The pipeline for the conservation of orthodox seeds in seed
genebanks [14] involves the steps summarized in table II. Each
14 https://www.ti.com/lit/ds/symlink/ina219.pdf

Fig. 5. Sampling current consumption with the INA219

of these steps is fundamental for a successful preservation
effort. In this paper, we concentrate on the storage step.
Although it represents only a single element of the complex
pipeline, it is nevertheless of fundamental importance. The
analysis of the data reveals that even SGSV, the most renowned
backup seed facility, has limited redundancy for certain seed
samples. This observation forms the basis of our vision
for Collective Seed Storage (CSS), a novel shared-economy
approach for the long-term storage of seeds in domestic
freezers. The CSS concept seeks to support the fundamental
goal of preserving seed diversity by leveraging IoT devices to
monitor proper storage conditions and blockchain technology
to distribute incentives that encourage active user participation.
A modern approach to seed preservation should promote
more active citizen participation (e.g., Seed Guardians) that
extends beyond the mere act of storage. Although the preservation of seeds in domestic freezers is a novel and valuable
practice, it may remain, to some extent, a passive activity.
However, we argue that the network of IoT devices forming the
CSS is not only a powerful tool for monitoring conservation
conditions, but also a means to initiate structured knowledge
sharing on effective seed preservation. In particular, the availability of quantitative, objective data can support evidencebased practices and serve as a foundation for more active
citizen engagement.
Greater involvement, such as participation in seed regeneration and cultivation, would not only directly enhance conservation efforts but also equip participants with practical knowledge of seed growth and management. Although such activities
lie beyond the scope of this work, we believe that the sharingeconomy principles underlying our CSS concept represent a
first step in this direction, laying the groundwork for deeper,
hands-on participation in the long-term preservation of seed
diversity.
The PoC proves the feasibility of the main technical components of our vision and a future collaboration with fridge
producers, might support the development of new products
supporting the CSS functionality since the design, also on

industrial refrigerators. The PoC also allowed us to identify
the priorities to be investigated in future work as summarized
below.
The monitoring activity confirms that acceptable subzero
conditions are achievable in domestic freezers; however, to
what extent we can better approach the ideal conditions
prescribed in Standard 4.2.3 [13] and the implications on
seed conservation of the observed temperature fluctuations,
need further investigation. While the current board proves
the feasibility of the proposed approach, the power consumption can still be optimized and more energy-efficient custom
boards, such as the trigboard15 , can significantly improve the
performance. The PoC relies on periodic transmission of the
observed conditions, the use of an alternative approach based
on the communication of abnormal events only, possibly based
on Ultra Low Power Coprocessor Programming, should be
evaluated.
In this work, user participation is incentivized through
a simple lottery. Looking ahead, we aim to explore more
sophisticated mechanisms, potentially informed by a gametheoretical framework. Beyond assessing technical feasibility,
it is essential to evaluate costs and design strategies that effectively encourage engagement. These strategies could combine
advanced tokenomics with the smart monitoring of seeds to
deliver value-added services; for instance, alerting users to
conditions that may compromise food preservation in their
refrigerators. By doing so, the system not only promotes active
participation in seed conservation but also provides tangible
everyday benefits, bridging the gap between individual action
and collective impact.
Facilitating easy and routine access to crop genetic resources is a fundamental goal of the Multilateral System
[2]. These resources may include local seed collections preserved in small refrigeration units within research laboratories,
national seed banks maintained by government institutions,
or comprehensive collections held by international research
centers that encompass all known varieties of a given crop.
Our goal is to explore how the paper’s proposed participative
approach can be integrated into the MLS. This includes
determining how to regulate the exchanges involving the new
category of users sharing their fridges, utilizing the Standard
Material Transfer Agreements (SMTAs).
R EFERENCES
[1] C. K. Khoury, S. Brush, D. E. Costich, H. A. Curry, S. de Haan,
J. M. M. Engels, L. Guarino, S. Hoban, K. L. Mercer, A. J. Miller, G. P.
Nabhan, H. R. Perales, C. Richards, C. Riggins, and I. Thormann, “Crop
genetic erosion: understanding and responding to loss of crop diversity,”
New Phytologist, vol. 233, no. 1, pp. 84–118, 2022. [Online]. Available:
https://nph.onlinelibrary.wiley.com/doi/abs/10.1111/nph.17733
[2] FAO, “The multilateral system,” 2025, last accessed April 2025
https://www.fao.org/plant-treaty/areas-of-work/the-multilateral-system/
landingmls/en/.
[3] I. T. on Plant Genetic Resources for Food and Agriculture, “Easy-smta
homepage,” 2025, last accessed June 2025 https://mls.planttreaty.org/itt/
index.php.
15 https://trigboard-docs.readthedocs.io/en/latest/

[4] FAO, “Tannex i: List of crops covered under the multilateral system,” 2025, last accessed April 2025 https://www.fao.org/plant-treaty/
areas-of-work/the-multilateral-system/annex1/en/.
[5] Navdanya, “Navdanya international,” 2025, last accessed April 2025
https://navdanyainternational.org/about-us-navdanya-international/.
[6] S. S. Exchange, “Keeping heirloom seeds in our gardens and on our
tables,” 2025, last accessed April 2025 https://seedsavers.org/.
[7] T. C. S. Library, “The connected seeds library,” 2025, last accessed April
2025 https://www.connectedseeds.org/.
[8] W. F. Program, “Supporting latin america’s ’custodians of the
seeds’,” 2025, last accessed April 2025 https://www.wfp.org/stories/
supporting-latin-americas-custodians-seeds.
[9] MSBP, “Millennium seed bank partnership homepage,” 2025, last accessed June 2025 https://brahmsonline.kew.org/msbp.
[10] C. Trust, “Crop trust homepage,” 2025, last accessed June 2025 https:
//www.croptrust.org/.
[11] C. G. on International Agricultural Research (CGIAR), “Cgiar
genebanks homepage,” 2025, last accessed June 2025 https://genebanks.
cgiar.org/.
[12] M. Hopkin, “Biodiversity: Frozen futures,” Nature, vol. 452, no. 7186,
pp. 404–405, Mar 2008. [Online]. Available: https://doi.org/10.1038/
452404a
[13] C. on Genetic Resources for Food and Agriculture., “Genebank standards for plant genetic resources for food and agriculture,” 2014,
available from https://www.fao.org/4/i3704e/i3704e.pdf.
[14] ——, “Practical guide for the application of the genebank standards for
plant genetic resources for food and agriculture conservation of orthodox
seeds in seed genebanks,” 2014, available from https://doi.org/10.4060/
cc0021en.
[15] MSB, The Millennium Seed Bank Partnership (MSBP) Seed
Conservation Standards for ‘MSBP Collections’. MSB, 2022.
[Online]. Available: https://brahmsonline.kew.org/Content/Projects/
msbp/resources/Training/MSBP-Seed-Conservation-Standards.pdf
[16] NordGen, “Svalbard global seed vault - annual progress report
2023,” 2023, available from https://www.nordgen.org/media/tyreut4t/
seedvault-annualprogressreport2023.pdf.
[17] J. Jacquemin, D. Bhatia, K. Singh, and R. A. Wing, “The
international oryza map alignment project: development of a genuswide comparative genomics platform to help solve the 9 billion-people
question,” Current Opinion in Plant Biology, vol. 16, no. 2, pp.
147–156, 2013, genome studies molecular genetics. [Online]. Available:
https://www.sciencedirect.com/science/article/pii/S1369526613000344
[18] M. De Vitis, F. R. Hay, J. B. Dickie, C. Trivedi, J. Choi, and R. Fiegener,
“Seed storage: maintaining seed viability and vigor for restoration use,”
Restoration Ecology, vol. 28, no. S3, pp. S249–S255, 2020.
[19] R. H. ELLIS and E. H. ROBERTS, “Improved Equations for the
Prediction of Seed Longevity,” Annals of Botany, vol. 45, no. 1, pp.
13–30, 01 1980.
[20] K. Frenken and J. Schor, “Putting the sharing economy into perspective,”
Environmental Innovation and Societal Transitions, vol. 23, pp. 3–10,
2017, sustainability Perspectives on the Sharing Economy.
[21] D. J. Langley, J. van Doorn, I. C. Ng, S. Stieglitz, A. Lazovik,
and A. Boonstra, “The internet of everything: Smart things and their
impact on business models,” Journal of Business Research, vol. 122,
pp. 853–863, 2021. [Online]. Available: https://www.sciencedirect.com/
science/article/pii/S014829631930801X
[22] D. Wu, T. Xiao, X. Liao, J. Luo, C. Wu, S. Zhang, Y. Li, and Y. Guo,
“When sharing economy meets iot: Towards fine-grained urban air
quality monitoring through mobile crowdsensing on bike-share system,”
Proc. ACM Interact. Mob. Wearable Ubiquitous Technol., vol. 4, no. 2,
Jun. 2020. [Online]. Available: https://doi.org/10.1145/3397328
[23] J. Hamari, M. Sjöklint, and A. Ukkonen, “The sharing economy:
Why people participate in collaborative consumption,” Journal of the
Association for Information Science and Technology, vol. 67, no. 9, pp.
2047–2059, 2016.
[24] R. Han, Z. Yan, X. Liang, and L. T. Yang, “How can incentive
mechanisms and blockchain benefit with each other? a survey,”
ACM Comput. Surv., vol. 55, no. 7, Dec. 2022. [Online]. Available:
https://doi.org/10.1145/3539604

